TCS-QAPL 2006 Special Issue Review Form


 Review  

   Paper number: 04
   Title:        Safe On-The-Fly Steady-State Detection for 
                 Time-Bounded Reachability
   Author(s):    Joost-Pieter Katoen, Ivan S. Zapreev
   

 Detailed Comments

The paper deals with detection of steady state equilibrium distribution
in CTMCs at early stages, i.e. before the end of large time bound. This
is used for optimizing computation in transient analysis. This problem
is particularly relevant in model checking for CTMCs, for example for
checking time-bounded formulae, such as the until U operator in CSL. 
The paper is mainly concerned to show an improvement on the error
bounds for detecting equilibria during time-bounded reachability.  In
order to safely detect equilibria (without introducing new errors), the
authors also devise a method that exploits the structure of CTMCs and
the algorithms for detecting steady state. 

The work is rather interesting and fits well with the topics covered by
the QAPL workshop. The paper does however suffer from a number of
problems, the two major ones being the lack of a strong contribution,
and the poor quality of the presentation. There are also several minor
problems, such as a number of English problems and typos, which can be
easily fixed by a careful pass on the paper.

For what concerns the weak contribution, the work presented in the paper
has been already published in the QAPL workshop and in Quest-2006. While
such a publication could of course provide the basis for a journal
publication, the current version includes proofs for the results but not
much more. I thus think that there is not enough novel material to
justify a journal publication.

The proofs can also be considered to illustrate the second problem,
namely the poor structure and presentation of the work. Several passages
of the paper are quite obscure and not properly motivated and explained
(e.g. the use of model checking in the introduction or, even more
seriously, the semantics of CSL); in particular some of the long proofs
would require a better guidance, more high-level explanations of what is
the gist behind the results, and proper definitions. Theorem 2.5
provides a useful example of all this (but other technical parts also
suffer from similar problems):
- aperiodic is not properly defined
- the theorem is very confusing and even seems to contradict itself:
  ||.||v is an arbitrary vector norm but the theorem does not hold for
  arbitrary vector norms, but only for those that satisfy the additional
  condition stated in the footnote.

Both these two problems require major revisions and, in fact, quite some
rewriting of the paper, to make it more readable and correct. They are
thus too serious for the paper to be acceptable for publication in a
special issue of Theoretical Computer Science, and I therefore recommend
rejection.
