TCS-QAPL 2006 Special Issue Review Form


 Review  

   Paper number: 04
   Title:        Safe On-The-Fly Steady-State Detection for 
                 Time-Bounded Reachability
   Author(s):    Joost-Pieter Katoen, Ivan S. Zapreev
   

 Detailed Comments

Summary: 

The authors present in this paper criteria for detecting steady states
in transient analysis for continuous time Markov Chains (CTMC). This
mainly consists of a ``slight refinment'' (p3,l15) of the Fox-Glynn
error bound, some related criteria for steady state detection
(addressing also the problem of false-positives, i.e. spurious stead
states) and finaly some experimental results.

The paper is extremely badly structured and the results are presented
in a very sloppy style which is unacceptable. The contribution of the
paper is rather limited as the authors themselves acknowledge. While
the first point could perhaps be fixed by a major revision, I think
that with regard to the second point the paper's contribution is below
the threshold for a journal like TCS (given also the fact that this is
an ``extended version'' of a previously published paper [13]). Though
the topic would fit well within the CfP for this special issue, I
nevertheless would recommend to reject the paper based on the grounds
that it lacks novelty and originality, that the presentation itself is
unsatifactory, and that its contribution appears to be rather
marginal.

To illustrate some of the points regarding the structure and
presentation: The paper starts with ``When performing transient
analysis ...'' - so I assumed that the intended audience is for people
who have some background in DTMCs or CTMCs, transient analyis, etc -
however in section 2 DTMCs or CTMCs are introduced in a very basic
(and incomplete way) way: Either the readers are expected to know
about MCs (which would make parts of section 2 irrelevant) or for
non-experts one would need a proper introduction to this area. The
introduction also talks about model checking issues (CSL, etc) without
explaining or motivating them, but only in section 4 there is some
motivation for reachabikity checks in stochastic model checking, CSL
etc. Particular anoying are pointers to later parts (see below, next
section etc., e.g. p7,l1 and l20) and repetitions, e.g. ``It boils
down...''  at the beginning of section 6, and at the end of section
2. Furthermore, I would like to see a better balance between quite
long proofs (which, I suspect, could be substentially shortened) and
explanaitions/motivations which are often missing or are in the worng
place, e.g. what is the aim/purpose of Jensen's method (p6), the
Remark at the beginning of section 5 (p12) seems to be completely out
of context and should be presented earlier,.....

The sloppyness of the presentation, to the point of reaching a level
which makes the paper un-readable is illustrated by a look at p6 (Thm
2.5): The theorem is formulated extremly cumbersome which make it
difficult to understand, in particular what are {\cal L}_ep and {\cal
R}_ep - do the depend on K, \delta, or..., what's the difference
bewteen p and \pi distributions, what does it mean that (according to
footnote 2) ``\|.\| is an arbritary vector norm'' but that Thm 2.5
``does not hold for an arbritray norm'', and so on and on and on.
Important notions like ``aperiodic'' (Thm 2.5), ``absorbing'' (Def
4.1.) are not defined fomally, the semantics if CSL is given in
section 4 just by handwaving (though it is essential for the
correctness of later statements), etc.
 
----