TCS-QAPL 2006 Special Issue Review Form


 Review  

 Paper number: 04
  
 Detailed Comments
 
 The authors deal with the time-bounded reachability problem in the setting
 of continuous-time Markov chains (CTMCs). This is a relevant problem in
 CTMC analysis with important practical effects because the efficiency of
 probabilistic model checkers strictly depends on the efficiency of the
 algorithms for time-bounded reachability.
 The objective of the paper is however related to the correctness of such
 algorithms which, as the authors show, can be guaranteed with a sustainable
 impact on the efficiency. More precisely, they show how steady-state 
 techniques can be safely adopted to save expensive computations when 
 performing the reachability analysis. In essence, the approach they propose 
 offers criteria for detecting (with the desired approximation) the steady 
 state behavior of the CTMC which allows for the correct reachability 
 analysis. The soundness of their technique is paid in the worst case 
 (corresponding to the backward reachability algorithm) by an overhead equal 
 to doubling the computation time. 
  
 In this respect, the paper well fits the scope of the special issue by
 discussing methodologies that are at the basis of the formal verification
 of probabilistic and timing properties of systems.
 
 The main results of the paper are: 
 - new error bounds for steady-state detection. This is not so original and,
 to some extent, represents an expected refinement of previous results. The
 results are valid (however I did not go into the details of the appendix 
 proofs). In practice, this part proposes the same results presented at the
 QEST conference in Riverside.
 - a technique to safely detect steady-state. This has interesting effects 
 in practice. A number of experiments have been conducted on a significant
 benchmark that puts in evidence the merits of the approach. This is the
 most original contribution of the paper with respect to previous work.
 I wonder whether the differences shown in the figures depend (only or 
 mainly) on the implementation of the proposed algorithm within MRMC, or 
 they also express the (in)efficiency of specific features of the tools 
 under consideration. Showing the same curves obtained through MRMC with 
 the activated/deactivated features of the newly implemented technique 
 would help to investigate the real merit (or impact) of the proposed 
 approach. Actually, this is done in Fig.4 only. Does it report the typical 
 behavior of the SSD mechanism for the whole benchmark? In general, more 
 comments and more scenarios (as done e.g. in the case of Fig. 5, where the 
 effect of changing an important parameter is shown) should be presented in 
 this section.

 Related work and comparison with existing techniques and tools are 
 adequately discussed. In general, the paper is well presented even if the 
 experimental part should deserve more details. As far as the originality 
 is concerned, actually the paper represents a smooth extension of the work 
 presented at the last QEST. 
 Both criticisms could be coped with by introducing a toy example 
 encompassing section 2 to section 6 and by adding more comments and 
 statistics in section 7. The proof of Proposition 3.2 can be moved to
 the appendix.  

